Design of a PID Controller for Controlling The Speed of an Instrumented Ebike
=============================================================================

:date: 2018-12-15 00:00:00
:tags: controls, instrumentation, engineering, mechatronics, bicycle
:category: research
:slug: ebike-controller-design
:authors: Trevor Metz
:summary: Blog post on designing a speed controller for an instrumented ebike.

Introduction
------------

The goal of this project is to design and implement a control system for an
instrumented ebike used in bicycle handling experimentation. To achieve this, a
basic unity feedback control architecture (Figure 1) is employed.

.. figure:: https://objects-us-east-1.dream.io/mechmotum/bike-speed-control-01.jpg
   :width: 80%
   :align: center
   :alt: Control Architecture.

   *Figure 1. Control architecture where e is the error between the actual
   speed v of the ebike and the desired speed, vd, and V is the DC input
   voltage to the ebike plant model. Gc and Gp represent the controller and
   plant model respectively.*

The goal of the controller is to track a setpoint speed, within +/- 0.10 m/s,
set by the rider.  To achieve this, a PID controller was tuned using MATLAB’s
Control System Toolbox. The ebike plant model was derived using first
principles and grey box system identification.

Modeling the eBike From First Principles
----------------------------------------

The dynamics of the ebike powertrain and the vehicle itself can be modeled from
first principles. The powertrain of the ebike consists of a standard ebike
conversion kit motor controller and a brushless 3 phase direct drive induction
motor mounted to the rear hub of the bike. A simple diagram of the ebike
drivetrain is shown below in Figure 2.

.. figure:: https://objects-us-east-1.dream.io/mechmotum/bike-speed-control-02.jpg
   :width: 80%
   :align: center
   :alt: Ebike Drivetrain Diagram.

   *Figure 2. Diagram of the drivetrain circuit and dynamics.*

In Figure 2, the induction motor is approximated by a model of a DC motor
circuit with resistance :math:`R`, inductance :math:`L` and back emf
:math:`V_b`. The torques :math:`T_m` and :math:`T_p` acting on the motor shaft
correspond to motor torque and wheel propulsion torque respectively. The
rotational dynamics of the drivetrain are defined by Euler’s rotation equation.

A simple equation of motion for the bicycle, modeled as a point mass, is
derived using Newton’s 2nd Law of Motion in the horizontal direction [Wilson]_.

.. figure:: https://objects-us-east-1.dream.io/mechmotum/bike-speed-control-03.jpg
   :width: 20%
   :align: center
   :alt: Free Body Diagram of Bicycle.

   *Figure 3. Free body diagram of the bicycle modeled as a point mass. Fa, Fr
   and Fp are the aerodynamic drag, rolling resistance and propulsive forces
   respectively.*

Together, the vehicle and drivetrain dynamics of the ebike can be shown in a
state space representation with state variables :math:`i(t)` and :math:`x(t)`
as seen below.

.. image:: https://objects-us-east-1.dream.io/mechmotum/bike-speed-control-04.jpg
   :width: 55%
   :align: center
   :alt: State Space Representation of the eBike.

From the state space representation, a transfer function from input DC voltage
:math:`V` to output speed :math:`v` is formed:

.. image:: https://objects-us-east-1.dream.io/mechmotum/bike-speed-control-05.jpg
   :width: 80%
   :align: center
   :alt: Plant Model Transfer Function.

This plant model is a second order transfer function relating an applied DC
voltage input to the ebike’s motor controller to the output speed of the ebike.
This model represents an approximation of the true plant model of the ebike. To
get a more accurate plant model, a grey box system identification procedure
based on measured time response data from the ebike was used.

Performing System Identification From Experimental Data
-------------------------------------------------------

To begin the process of system identification, the values of the ebike
drivetrain model parameters and bicycle drag and tire rolling resistance
coefficients were initialized using reasonable approximations found from
internet searches, previous knowledge of the instrumented ebike [Moore]_ and
textbook resources [Wilson]_.

In MATLAB, a nonlinear least-squares solver was used to optimize the constants
in the derived plant model of the ebike to match a speed time response measured
from the instrumented ebike. Figure 4, below, shows the curve fitting result.

.. figure:: https://objects-us-east-1.dream.io/mechmotum/bike-speed-control-06.jpg
   :width: 80%
   :align: center
   :alt: Curve Fitting Results.

   *Figure 4. Result of the least-squares curve fitting.*

Figure 4 shows that the plant model of ebike was reasonably identified using
the least-squares curve fitting method. The resulting ebike plant model is:

.. image:: https://objects-us-east-1.dream.io/mechmotum/bike-speed-control-07.jpg
   :width: 90%
   :align: center
   :alt: Identified Plant Model.

Controller Design in MATLAB
---------------------------

With the plant model of the ebike identified, a PID controller (kp = 68.5, ki =
106, kd = 1.44) was tuned for zero steady state error and reasonable transient
behavior using MATLAB’s Control System Toolbox.

The closed loop step response (Figure 5) shows that the controller meets the
design goals with zero steady state error, a settling time of 1.56s, and an
overshoot percentage of 10.45%.

.. figure:: https://objects-us-east-1.dream.io/mechmotum/bike-speed-control-08.jpg
   :width: 80%
   :align: center
   :alt: Closed Loop System Step Response.

   *Figure 5. Closed Loop System Step Response.*

Evaluation of Controller Robustness
-----------------------------------

MATLAB’s Robust Control Toolbox was used to test the robustness of the closed
loop system with regards to uncertainties in the coefficients of the identified
ebike plant model. The constants in the derived ebike plant model were lumped
together forming the following simplified plant model:

.. image:: https://objects-us-east-1.dream.io/mechmotum/bike-speed-control-09.jpg
   :width: 90%
   :align: center
   :alt: Simplified Plant Model.

The constants :math:`a`, :math:`b`, :math:`c`, and :math:`d` in the above
transfer function were defined in MATLAB as real-uncertain parameters with
varying percentage based uncertainties about their nominal values. The nominal
values of each coefficient were taken from the result of the system
identification step of the controller design process.  Figure 6, below, shows
the nominal closed loop and open loop system step response with 20 random
samples of the uncertain plant model defined by the uncertain coefficients.

.. figure:: https://objects-us-east-1.dream.io/mechmotum/bike-speed-control-10.jpg
   :width: 80%
   :align: center
   :alt: Uncertain Step Response.

   *Figure 6. Step response of the nominal closed loop system with 20 random
   samples of the uncertain closed loop step response superimposed on the
   plot.*

Figure 6 shows that the closed loop system is reasonably robust despite
uncertainty in the plant model. Having this robustness in the control system
means that small changes in the dynamics of the ebike will not cause the
controller to have undesirable performance.

Conclusion
----------

A simple PID controller used in a unity feedback control architecture was
designed to reduce the steady state error and improve the transient performance
of the speed time response of an instrumented ebike. Using grey box system
identification, the plant model of the ebike was identified and used in the
controller design. A PID tuner app was used to tune the controller constants to
achieve zero steady state gain and favorable transient behavior. Finally, the
robustness of the controller was tested by simulating uncertainties in the
closed loop system.

The next step in the project is to take the continuous time PID controller and
implement it digitally on the instrumented ebike. Stay tuned for part two:
Implementing a PID Controller on an Instrumented Ebike.

References
----------

.. [Wilson] Wilson, D., Papadopoulos, J. and Whitt, F. (2004). Bicycling science.
   Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

.. [Moore] Moore, J. (2012). Human Control of a Bicycle.
   Available at: http://moorepants.github.io/dissertation/davisbicycle.html
   [Accessed 12 Dec. 2018].
