===================================================
Kirsten Dijkman Successfully Defends Her MSc Thesis
===================================================

:date: 2024-01-12 06:09:00
:tags: bicycle, engineering, sports, tires, rolling resistance
:category: news
:slug: kirsten-dijkman-graduates
:authors: Jason K. Moore

.. list-table::
   :class: borderless
   :width: 60%
   :align: center

   *  - |cover|
      - |headshot|

.. |headshot| image:: https://objects-us-east-1.dream.io/mechmotum/headshot-dijkman-kirsten.jpg
   :height: 400px

.. |cover| image:: https://objects-us-east-1.dream.io/mechmotum/thesis-cover-dijkman.png
   :height: 400px

Kirsten Dijkman successfully defended "`Impact of bicycle tire parameters on
the total rolling losses
<http://resolver.tudelft.nl/uuid:7d45c36f-5df4-46bf-a526-b3f28a4a9fab>`_" on
January 11, 2024. Kirsten executed three experiments to investigate all aspects
of forward motion energy losses due to the bicycle-rider system rolling on
different road surfaces. She first characterized the tire contact patch for a
set of modern tubular and tubeless racing tires, finding that tire carcass
diameter had no effect on contact patch length and that inflation pressure (in
the range tested) had no effect on contact patch width, but tire type and
vertical load all correlate to contact patch dimensions. She then tested these
tires for rolling resistance on a traditional drum testing machine and found
that all testing variables (tire dimensions, pressure, load, and rolling speed)
predict rolling resistance. Tubeless tires have more rolling resistance than
tubular and rolling resistance decreases with increasing inflation pressure and
decreasing speed. In the third experiment, Kirsten developed a
first-of-its-kind trailer to create a windless environment for a cyclist to
travel over any road surface which we named "De Veeger".  She then measured
rider input power over smooth asphalt and bumpier bricks to characterize the
total rolling losses due to both the tire properties and the vibrational
damping losses in the bicycle, suspension, and rider. This revealed a clear
dependence on road surface type and travel speed: bricks and higher speeds
causing more rolling energy loss. However, the input power estimates were not
precise enough to show any effect of tire properties on the total rolling
losses, which leaves room for future improvements to the measurement system.

.. raw:: html

   <center>
   <iframe width="560" height="315"
   src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/685I6pjQcfw?si=-uKNN13BkDehnaQ6"
   title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay;
   clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share"
   allowfullscreen></iframe>
   </center>

Kirsten was co-supervised by Andrew Dressel (TU Delft & University of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee), Harm Ubbens (Team DSM), Piet Rooijakkers (Team DSM), and
Jason K. Moore (TU Delft). Thanks to Jan van Frankenhuyzen, the ME workshop,
and Dijkman Carbaat Bouw for all the help. Everyone at the bicycle lab is very
proud of Kirsten and wishes her the best in her next adventures.
