======================================================
Near Zero Speed Reaction Wheel Balanced Cargo Bicycles
======================================================

:date: 2023-10-27
:status: hidden
:slug: jobs/msc/near-zero-speed-reaction-wheel-cargo-bicycle
:template: msc-project

.. list-table::
   :class: borderless
   :width: 100%
   :widths: 50 50
   :align: center

   * - |reaction-wheel-cad|
     - |first-reaction-wheel-cargo-bike|

.. |reaction-wheel-cad| image:: https://objects-us-east-1.dream.io/mechmotum/reaction-wheel-cad.png
   :width: 100%

.. |first-reaction-wheel-cargo-bike| image:: https://objects-us-east-1.dream.io/mechmotum/first-reaction-wheel-cargo-bike.png
   :width: 100%

Two wheel cargo bicycle use has grown over the last decade. Increases in "last
mile" home delivery of goods and food requires rapid, versatile delivery in
urban areas. Bicycles with cargo areas are optimal solutions for distributed
urban delivery. The vehicles also allow for green transportation for families.
With the growth of safer bicycle infrastructure in many countries, these
vehicles replace more and more cars for various family activities.
Electrification has played a key role in making bicycles more suitable for both
of these tasks allowing for lower rider input power or even increased loads.
Electric pedal assist enables these technology adoptions, but with the existing
onboard electrical system, the opportunity to provide more types of assistance
presents itself. We are interested in expanding the applications to electric
steer assisting motors. Steer assist has the potential to improve safety and
convenience.

One particular problem cargo two-wheelers face is at low and near zero speeds
the vehicles are hard to balance and handle. Delivery people need to quickly
park their vehicle without the need for a bicycle rack or cumbersome kickstands
for quick door calls. Similarly, parents need to seat and remove their children
from the vehicle without worrying that it would fall. Also, both vehicles come
to a stop in traffic many times throughout a trip. At every instance near zero
speed, assistance in balance would relieve the rider from any difficulties of
balancing the vehicle.

Many single vehicle accidents occur in this near zero speed regime and we're
interested in finding solutions to improve safety and convenience in this speed
regime. For safety in child carrying vehicles, this is of particular concern.
Reducing the skill and effort necessary for balancing a loaded cargo bike at
low speeds would provide an accessible replacement for tasks typically
performed with cars. This could reduce the number of trips taken by car and,
with fewer cars, interactions with vulnerable road users could decrease within
urban centers.

We have constructed a reaction wheel capable of balancing a cargo bicycle and
its passengers, but it has yet to balance the bicycle on its own. This
mechtronic oriented MSc project will involve improving the reaction wheel's
mechanical design to withstand the large torque magnitude, designing and
implementing a controller that is robust, and testing the viability of the
prototype. The microcontroller is currently implemented in C++ on a Raspberry
Pi 4 and the reaction wheel is installed on a Workcycles bakfiets.

You will collaborate with our partners in Sweden and California on the
microcontroller.
